README.md, before:

# Dalex
Using cost function minimization to directly find confidence limits in
high-dimensional parameter spaces.

## Dependencies

To build and run Dalex, you will need the ARPACK, LAPACK, and BLAS linear
algebra libraries.  We downloaded those libraries from

www.caam.rice.edu/software/ARPACK

www.netlib.org/lapack (for both LAPACK and BLAS)

Once built and installed, you will need to modify the LAPACK_LIB, BLAS_LIB,and
ARPACK_LIB variables in the Makefile to point to the correct libraries.  You may
also need to modify FORTRAN_LIB to allow C++ to link to the libraries (which are
built with Fortran).

## Running examples

The likelihood functions from the paper are made available in easy to build and
run examples.  `Make curved_4d` will produce an executable `bin/curved_4d` that
runs Dalex on the 4-dimensional curved likelihood function from the paper.
`Make curved_12d` produces an example based on the curved 12-dimensional
likelihood function.  `Make ellipse_12d` produces an example based on the
ellipsoidal 12-dimensional likelihood function.  The call signatures for these
functions are all of the form

```
./bin/curved_4d -s S -n N -o out_name -t timing_name
```

where `S` is an integer seeding the random number generator, `N` is the number
of likelihood evaluations to make with Dalex, `out_name` is the name of the file
where the output data will be written, and `timing_name` is the name of a file to
which information summarizing the wall-time efficiency of Dalex will be written.

## Output

Running Dalex produces two output files.  The file specified by `out_name` above
contains a list of all of the points samples by Dalex.  The columns in that file
are
```
# p1 p2 ... pD chisq log
```
where `p*` are the parameter space coordinates of the points, `chi^2` is the
value of chi-squared at those points, and `log` is an integer denoting what type
of search was used to sample that particular point (these integers are defined at
the top of `include/chisq_wrapper.h` for the curious; they should not have any
bearing on uses of Dalex; contact the author at scott.f.daniel@gmail.com if you
are interested in using this information, as it is not currently
well-documented).

The file specified by `timing_file` lists information useful for keeping track
of how computationally efficient Dalex is being.  The columns of this file are:

- The number of points Dalex has evaluated and stored in its history.
- The number of times the chi-squared function has been called.  This could be
different from the first column if points have been called at which the
chi-squared function returned an exception but caught it gracefully, in which
case Dalex will not include the point in its history.  Also note that this
column will only be non-zero if the chi-squared function's `operator()`
increments the `_called` member variable (see below, where we explain how to
implement your own chi-squared function).
- The current minimum discovered value of chi-squared.
- The current target value of chi-squared on the confidence limit.
- The total wall-clock time elapsed since Dalex began.
- The average wall-clock time per call to chi-squared spent since the last time
timing data was written out.
- The total wall-clock time spent in the chi-squared function.
- The average wall-clock time spent in the chi-squared function per call to
chi-squared over the whole Dalex run.
- The wall-clock time overhead per call to chi-squared all of the chi-squared
evaluations since the last time timing data was written.

## Implementing your own chi-squared function

The source code file `src/examples/basic_example.cpp` shows how to implement an
arbitrary chi-squared function.  To build and run this example, run
```
Make basic_example
./bin/basic_example
```
This will create files `output/workspace/basic_output.txt` and
`output/workspace/basic_timing.txt` (you will have to make sure that the
directory `output/workspace/` exists).  Examining this code, you will see how to
implement an arbitrary chi-squared function for use with Dalex.  In summary: the
chis-squared function must inherit from the class `chisquared`, which is defined
in the files `include/chisq.h` and `src/utils/chisq.cpp`.  The arbitrary
chi-squared function must also implement an `operator()` which accepts as
argument a `cont array_1d<double>&` representing the point in parameter space
where chi-square is to be evaluated and returns a double representing the value
of chi-squared at that point.  `array_1d<double>` is an example of a special
array-like class implemented for Dalex.  It is designed to throw an exception if
you ever ask for a value that does not exist (e.g. asking for the fifth
element of an array of three numbers).  The `array` classes are defined in
`include/containers.h`.  For the purposes of implementing your own chi-squared
function, it is enough to know that `x.get_data(i)` returns the `i`th element of
an `array` `x`.  `x.set_data(i,2.0)` sets the `i`th element of `x` to be `2.0`.

Commit message:

alert users to harmless warning messages

README.md, after:

# Dalex
Using cost function minimization to directly find confidence limits in
high-dimensional parameter spaces.

## Dependencies

To build and run Dalex, you will need the ARPACK, LAPACK, and BLAS linear
algebra libraries.  We downloaded those libraries from

www.caam.rice.edu/software/ARPACK

www.netlib.org/lapack (for both LAPACK and BLAS)

Once built and installed, you will need to modify the LAPACK_LIB, BLAS_LIB,and
ARPACK_LIB variables in the Makefile to point to the correct libraries.  You may
also need to modify FORTRAN_LIB to allow C++ to link to the libraries (which are
built with Fortran).

## Running examples

The likelihood functions from the paper are made available in easy to build and
run examples.  `Make curved_4d` will produce an executable `bin/curved_4d` that
runs Dalex on the 4-dimensional curved likelihood function from the paper.
`Make curved_12d` produces an example based on the curved 12-dimensional
likelihood function.  `Make ellipse_12d` produces an example based on the
ellipsoidal 12-dimensional likelihood function.  The call signatures for these
functions are all of the form

```
./bin/curved_4d -s S -n N -o out_name -t timing_name
```

where `S` is an integer seeding the random number generator, `N` is the number
of likelihood evaluations to make with Dalex, `out_name` is the name of the file
where the output data will be written, and `timing_name` is the name of a file to
which information summarizing the wall-time efficiency of Dalex will be written.

Note: when Dalex exits because it has sampled all of the points you requested,
it prints a warning message to `stdout`.  This is expected and harmless and will
be fixed in the near future.  If an actual error occurs, you will notice that
your output and timing files do not reflect the full number of samples you
specified by `N`.

## Output

Running Dalex produces two output files.  The file specified by `out_name` above
contains a list of all of the points samples by Dalex.  The columns in that file
are
```
# p1 p2 ... pD chisq log
```
where `p*` are the parameter space coordinates of the points, `chi^2` is the
value of chi-squared at those points, and `log` is an integer denoting what type
of search was used to sample that particular point (these integers are defined at
the top of `include/chisq_wrapper.h` for the curious; they should not have any
bearing on uses of Dalex; contact the author at scott.f.daniel@gmail.com if you
are interested in using this information, as it is not currently
well-documented).

The file specified by `timing_file` lists information useful for keeping track
of how computationally efficient Dalex is being.  The columns of this file are:

- The number of points Dalex has evaluated and stored in its history.
- The number of times the chi-squared function has been called.  This could be
different from the first column if points have been called at which the
chi-squared function returned an exception but caught it gracefully, in which
case Dalex will not include the point in its history.  Also note that this
column will only be non-zero if the chi-squared function's `operator()`
increments the `_called` member variable (see below, where we explain how to
implement your own chi-squared function).
- The current minimum discovered value of chi-squared.
- The current target value of chi-squared on the confidence limit.
- The total wall-clock time elapsed since Dalex began.
- The average wall-clock time per call to chi-squared spent since the last time
timing data was written out.
- The total wall-clock time spent in the chi-squared function.
- The average wall-clock time spent in the chi-squared function per call to
chi-squared over the whole Dalex run.
- The wall-clock time overhead per call to chi-squared all of the chi-squared
evaluations since the last time timing data was written.

## Implementing your own chi-squared function

The source code file `src/examples/basic_example.cpp` shows how to implement an
arbitrary chi-squared function.  To build and run this example, run
```
Make basic_example
./bin/basic_example
```
This will create files `output/workspace/basic_output.txt` and
`output/workspace/basic_timing.txt` (you will have to make sure that the
directory `output/workspace/` exists).  Examining this code, you will see how to
implement an arbitrary chi-squared function for use with Dalex.  In summary: the
chis-squared function must inherit from the class `chisquared`, which is defined
in the files `include/chisq.h` and `src/utils/chisq.cpp`.  The arbitrary
chi-squared function must also implement an `operator()` which accepts as
argument a `cont array_1d<double>&` representing the point in parameter space
where chi-square is to be evaluated and returns a double representing the value
of chi-squared at that point.  `array_1d<double>` is an example of a special
array-like class implemented for Dalex.  It is designed to throw an exception if
you ever ask for a value that does not exist (e.g. asking for the fifth
element of an array of three numbers).  The `array` classes are defined in
`include/containers.h`.  For the purposes of implementing your own chi-squared
function, it is enough to know that `x.get_data(i)` returns the `i`th element of
an `array` `x`.  `x.set_data(i,2.0)` sets the `i`th element of `x` to be `2.0`.
